Begin GenericDispatch document (#1603)
hylo-lang/hylo: Docs/GenericDispatch.md

foundations using a form of manual type erasure, and their
implementations usually cannot be changed without breaking clients.

In general, separate compilation limits the compiler's ability to make
optimizations, because it cannot see across the separate compilation
boundary.  Maintaining performance depends on doing enough computation
*within* a compilation boundary that the cost paid to cross the
boundary becomes insignificant.  Unfortunately, that's not always
possible with generic code: because a heavily-used concept requirement
(whose implementation is often as lightweight as an integer increment)
may lie across such a boundary from the algorithm that calls it.
Whether to pay these costs in exchange for the benefits of separate
compilation—where it is useful—is a choice for programmers to make,
not language designers.

Hylo supports an optimization step that eliminates the costs of
separate compilation without changing semantics, but that optimization
can be selectively disabled:

- globally, to improve compile times; typically for a debug build.
- at select module boundaries, to allow binary-compatible library
  evolution.

> - A concept applies to a single type, not some tuple of types.

Reviewer: It seems like this bullet points do not follow the previous ones.

Author: yes, will fix

- The concept's requirements are specified in `trait`s.
  - Method requirements are specified in a `trait` by ordinary

>     signatures that must be matched exactly by implementations in a

Reviewer: I wonder about how "exact" we want the implementation to match the corresponding requirement.

First, a couple of precisions:
- Matching is up to renaming of parameter names (generic and non-generic), i.e., `<T, U>(x t: T) -> U` matches `<A, B>(x a: A) -> B`.
- Matching is up to unification of associated types, i.e., `(x: Self.Element) -> Self.Position` matches `(x: T) -> Int` in the implementation of `Array<T>`'s conformance to `Collection`.

Then there's the question of matching a signature with a "subtype". For example, `(A) -> B` can implement `(A) inout -> B`. I also wonder if similar considerations should be made for `(A) -> B` implementing `(inout A) -> B`. For other pairs of passing conventions the picture is even more complicated because we need to consider `A`'s conformance to `Deinitializable`.

Author: Yeah, and like a non-throwing implementation should match one marked `throws`.  I'm dropping “exactly.”
```suggestion
    signatures that must be matched by implementations in a
```

    conformance and type equality bounds.
- Trait requirements can have default implementations.
- Traits can refine other traits
- Generic type parameters can have conformance and type equality bounds.
- All conformances of types to traits are explicitly specified
- APIs available on generic parameters are restricted to those given
  by their bounds in that context.

(Details, capabilities, and syntax sugars irrelevant to this
discussion are omitted).

Examples:

```hylo
trait Equatable {
  fun equals(_: Self) -> Bool // method requirement
}

trait Hashable: Equatable { // trait refinement
  fun hash(into: inout Hasher)
}

trait Iter {
  type Element // associated type requirement
  fun next() inout -> Optional<Element>
}

trait Sequence {
  type Iterator: Iter // associated type conformance bound

  fun iterator() -> Iter

  fun equals<Other: Sequence>(_: Other) -> Bool
    where Self.Element == Other.Element, // type equality bound
          Self.Element: Equatable

  // requirement with default implementation
  fun nth(_ n_: Int) -> Optional<Iter.Element> {
    var i = iterator()
    for n in 0..<n_ { _ = i.next() }

>     return i.next()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return i.next() as _
```

Author: Sorry, can you explain why?

Reviewer: Certainly. Your function returns an optional and Hylo doesn't allow implicit conversion from `T` to `T?`.

Author: Doesn't i.next also return an optional?

Author: Doesn't i.next also return an optional?

Reviewer: Oh, it does. My bad. Then you need `&i.next()` but the `as _` is indeed useless, sorry.

Author: ```suggestion
    return &i.next()
```

  }
}
```

## Separate Compilation and Dispatch

When generics are separately type checked, the operations on generic
parameters are restricted to those implied by the bounds on those
parameters.

```hylo
conformance X: Hashable {
  public fun hash(into: inout Hasher)
}

fun f<T: Equatable>(_ x: T) {
  x.equals(x) // OK
  var h = Hasher()
  x.hash(into: &h) // Error: no 'hash' method on 'x'.
}

f(X())
```

It doesn't matter that `f` will called on a `Hashable` object; its
bound that `T` is `Equatable` doesn't allow `f` to use a `Hashable`
requirement.  That may seem obvious, but separate *type checking* has
important implications for modular *separate compilation*, because the
implementation of a generic function can only depend on its declared
requirements and the specific types being passed to it.

### Compilation Model

Despite the fact that the *semantics* of generics is thought of as
“static dispatch,” different types will have different implementations
of any trait requirement, and therefore a separately-compiled generic
function—a single implementation in object code that can be used
regardless of the function's generic parameters—must access these

> implementations via a dynamic *mechanism*.

Reviewer: I think there's something wrong with this sentence. I got lost in the middle.

Author: Thanks, I'll revisit it.  It is certainly long.

Reviewer: It's good now.

Most typically a generic function desugars into a function
that, for each trait bound, additionally accepts a “witness table”
containing implementations of that trait's requirements, so

```hylo
fun f<T: Equatable>(_ x: T) -> Bool {
  return x.equals(x)
}
```

desugars to

```hylo

> fun f<T: Equatable>(_ x: T, _ w: EquatableWitness) -> Bool {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fun f<T>(_ x: T, _ w: EquatableWitness) -> Bool {
```
I think it's relevant to say that the desugaring transforms constraints into parameters. So the constraints disappear.

Author: good point.

}
```

Every conformance declaration desugars into the declaration of a
constant witness table, so you can think of the witness table as the
reification of the conformance.

Other mechanisms are possible, but witness tables provide  predictable
performance, and the choice of mechanism doesn't ultimately affect the
semantic decisions that we are discussing here.  Therefore, without
loss of generality, the rest of this discussion is framed in terms of
witness tables.

### Static Invisibility of Concrete Types

The process by which languages like C++ and Rust take generic
(type-polymorphic) components and produce concrete implementations for
the specific types passed is called *monomorphization*.  It involves
following concrete types passed into a tree of generic component uses
until they bottom out in concrete code again at the leaves.  Rust
generics  are separately type checked, so that process happens before
monomorphization, while in C++, it happens afterwards.

When generics are separately *compiled*, by contrast, the implementation
details of a generic component are unavailable to the compiler at its
use-sites.  Only the declaration of that component is available, so

> the compiler cannot follow a type through the tree its leaves;

Reviewer: It seems a preposition is missing here.

Author: ```suggestion
the compiler cannot follow a type through the tree to its leaves;
```

of something we want to support: the post-hoc definition of a
specializable algorithm given a set of trait requirements. Below,
`some_algorithm` has a default implementation that depends only on the
requirements of `P`, but has a specialized implementation when the
conforming type also conforms to `Equatable`.

```hylo
trait SomeAlgorithm {
  fun some_algorithm()
}
conformance<T> T: SomeAlgorithm where T: P {
  fun some_algorithm() { ... } // default implementation
}
specialization<T: P & Equatable> T: SomeAlgorithm {
  fun some_algorithm() { ... } // specialized implementation
}
```

### No Local Conformances

The most significant effect of an overlapping conformance ban is that
two modules each defining a local conformance `X: P` can't
coexist. The “orphan rule” described
[above](#no-generalized-post-hoc-conformance) is probably the most
effective way to prevent that from happening.  Any other approach we
know of allows situations where an update to module X can't be used
because of a conformance conflict with some unrelated module.  These
conformances might not even be visible in the module's public API, but
they would have to appear in diagnostics, which is never a good

> look. Avoiding that dynamic is a primary motivator for separate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
look. Avoiding that dynamic check is a primary motivator for separate
```

Author: I really didn't meant that.
```suggestion
look. Avoiding diagnostics that point to implemetnation details
is a primary motivator for separate
```

conformances for that argument, or where the conformances the
argument depends on are not satisfied:

```hylo
// module A
public trait P { fun boo() -> Int }
public type X<T: P> { public memberwise init }

// module B
import A
private conformance Int: P {
  public fun boo() -> Int { return 3 }
}
let x = X<Int>()

// module C
import B
private conformance Int: P {
  public fun boo() -> Int { return 4 }
}
let x = X<Int>() // OK
let bx = B.x     // Error: X<Int> depends on a different conformance Int: P

// module C
import B

// Error: X<Int> depends on conformance Int: P, which is not in scope
let bx = B.x
```

- Note: the phrasing of the restriction is carefully chosen to handle
  cases like this, where some of the generic arguments are concrete:

    ```hylo
    // module A
    public trait P { fun boo() -> Int }
    public type X<T: P, U> { public memberwise init }

    // module B
    import A
    private conformance Int: P {
      public fun boo() -> Int { return 3 }
    }
    fun g<U>() -> T<Int, U>

    // module C
    import B
    fun h<V>() {
      // Error: result T<Int, V> depends on a conformance `Int: P`
      // that is not in scope.
      let x = g<V>()
    }

>     let x = B.g<Bool>()

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if it would be more suitable to prevent exposing functions like g as public if they can essentially be never used from the outside.

Author: Interesting question (cc @kyouko-taiga); that would be very consistent with what Swift does.

On the other hand, we could also choose to allow them to be used as temporary values that never have names, so, e.g.:

```hylo
    // module C
    import B
    fun ff<T>(_ x: T) {}
    
    fun h<V>() {
      ff(g<V>())  // OK <== HERE
    }
```

I actually would prefer not to, but thought I'd raise it.

Reviewer: `g` is not public in the example and I guess it is supposed to return `X<Int, U>` (which is defined in `A`) rather than `T<Int, U>`.

So assuming it was declared as `public g<U>() -> T<Int, U>`, the declaration should be reported illegal since `T<Int, U>` is exposing a private value. I think the rationale should be that `T<Int, U>` is really `T<Int, U, w>` where `w` is the value of the private conformance, and so clearly that doesn't satisfy access controls.

Reviewer: If we wanted to support such a pattern I think we'd need a way to explicitly declare an existential type (in the sense of TAPL §24, i.e. not to be confused with existential container). But then we'd be sort of implementing OCaml modules and perhaps that is a lead to explore later.

Author: Thanks all; @tothambrus11's suggestion simplifies the example.

>     import A
>     private conformance Int: P {
>       public fun boo() -> Int { return 3 }
>     }
>     fun g<U>() -> T<Int, U>
> 
>     // module C
>     import B
>     fun h<V>() {
>       // Error: result T<Int, V> depends on a conformance `Int: P`
>       // that is not in scope.
>       let x = g<V>()
>     }
>     let x = B.g<Bool>()

Author: ```suggestion
    import A
    private conformance Int: P {
      public fun boo() -> Int { return 3 }
    }
    // Error: result T<Int, V> depends on a non-public 
    // conformance `Int: P`.
    public fun g<U>() -> X<Int, U>
```
